docs/source/user-settings.md, before:

---
title: 'Tatin User Settings'
description: ''
keywords:
---
# User settings


Your Tatin user settings specify your ‘known registries’
– the Tatin registries you want to use –
and some other settings you might use if you publish packages yourself.

When you launch Dyalog[^init], it reads your user-settings file

    tatin-client.json

into `⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings`, a class instance.
If you don’t have a Tatin user-settings file, Dyalog creates one
in your [home folder](user-commands.md#user-settings).

The default user-settings file lists two registries:

          ]ListRegistries
     Alias       URL                     ...
     ----------  ----------------------- ...
     tatin       https://tatin.dev/      ...
     tatin-test  https://test.tatin.dev/ ...

<!-- Implementation detail: not relevant

### What does Tatin do at start-up time?

When Tatin is initialized[^init] it creates an instance of the `UserSettings` class with the name `MyUserSettings` which lives in `⎕se.Tatin`. (Strictly speaking it lives actually in `⎕SE._Tatin`; in `⎕SE.Tatin` there is just a niladic function `MyUserSettings` that returns a reference to `⎕SE._Tatin.MyUserSettings`)

If the constructor does not get a fully qualified name of the user settings file as an argument then it performs two steps:

1. It looks for a file `.tatin` in the user's home folder.

   If the file exists and is not empty then it is expected to point to a user settings file, and Tatin will go for that file.

   We will discuss soon under which circumstances such a file might be useful.

2. In case there is no file `.tatin` in that folder, or the file is empty, Tatin will look for a user settings file in the default folder.

   * If that file exists then Tatin will instantiate it

   * If the file does not exist then it will be created with default settings
 -->

## Edit your settings


??? tip "Edit your settings with the user command"

    You can use any editor to change your user-settings.

    On launching Dyalog,
    Tatin checks your user-settings file is valid JSON5
    and signals any errors in it.

    If you use the user command
    ```
    ]TATIN.UserSettings -edit
    ```
    to edit the file, Tatin will check the file when you save it.

Other settings define the defaults used when you create a new package.

-----------|---------------------------------------------------------
group      | group name your packages will use
license    | license you usually use to publish a package
maintainer | email address of the maintainer of your packages
source     | name of a folder in your package where all source files are stored

??? tip "Comments in JSON5"

    JSON5 accommodates two different types of comments:

    block
    : Everything between `/*` and `*/` is recognized as a comment, e.g.

        ```
        /*
          This is a comment that...
          stretches over several lines
        */.
        ```

    line

    : A line that starts with two slashes, e.g.

        ```
        // This is a comment line
        ```

Editing your user-settings file leaves your current user settings unchanged.
To update them from the file:

    ]TATIN.UserSettings -refresh

To save your current user settings to file:

    ⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings.Save 1



## Keeping settings elsewhere

For most purposes all you need is a single user-settings file in its default location.

In some circumstances you might prefer to keep your user-settings file elsewhere:

-   You need different settings for corporate and personal projects.
-   You need to edit the settings but do not have write access to your home folder.
-   Your computer is shared with others, at least one of whom needs write access to the settings.

First, change the current user-settings location:
```
      p←,⊂'/path2/user_config_file/'
      ⎕SE._Tatin.Client.MyUserSettings←⎕SE._Tatin.Client.⎕NEW ⎕SE.Tatin.UserSettings p
      ⍴⎕←1 ⎕se.Tatin.ListRegistries 0
tatin      https://tatin.dev       ... 0 100 0
tatin-test https://test.tatin.dev  ... 0   0 0
2 7
      ⍴⎕←⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.ListRegistries 0
 Alias  URL                  Port  Priority No caching Proxy API-key
 -----  ------------------   ----  -------- ---------- ----- -------
 tatin  https://tatin.dev/      0       100          0           ***
 test-tatin  https://tatin.dev/ 0       100          0           ***
2 7
```
Then make the new location the default:
```
      ⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings.MakeDefaultFile 1
```

<!-- You may however want to have your own Tatin Registries, for example for private projects. -->

<!-- WAY TOO CUMBERSOME – JSON SUFFICES

## Adding and removing Registries

You can manipulate the `MyUserSettings` instance via its methods.

We are now going to add a registry, list all registries, and then delete that registry, getting us back to where we started.

### What have we got?

Let's list all registries currently defined:

```
      ⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.ListRegistries 0
Alias      URL                     Port  Priority No caching Proxy API-key
-----      ------------------      ----  -------- ---------- ----- -------
tatin      https://tatin.dev/         0       100          0           ***
tatin-test https://test.tatin.dev/    0         0          0           ***
```

This is because originally Tatin only knows about the principal Tatin server and its cousin, the test server.

Note that the API key is not listed when a zero is provided as the right argument.

Let's add a made-up registry.

#### Create an instance of the `DefineRegistry` class.

Let's assume that you work for a company "MyCompany", and that this company entertains a Tatin Server with the URL `https://tatin.mycompany.com`.

To add that Registry to the user settings file you must first instantiate the `DefineRegistry` class. You may specify the URL and the alias in several ways; for details on the `DefineRegistry` class execute this:

```
]adoc ⎕se.Tatin.DefineRegistry
```

We will pass a simple text vector that specifies the alias (between `[]`) and the URI:

```
      #.myReg←⎕NEW ⎕SE.Tatin.DefineRegistry (,⊂'[myc]https://tatin.mycompany.com')
      #.myReg.varsList
 uri  alias  port  api_key  priority
      ]box on
      {⍵,⍪#.myReg.(⍎¨⍵)}'uri' 'alias' 'port' 'api_key' 'priority'
┌────────┬────────────────────────────┐
│uri     │https://tatin.mycompany.com/│
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│alias   │myc                         │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│port    │0                           │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│api_key │                            │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│priority│[Null]                      │
└────────┴────────────────────────────┘
      ]box off
```

"id" is not mentioned here, because it is optional, and `DefineRegistry` will assign a freshly generated UUID to it for you. Refer to [The "id"](#) for details.

#### Settings in the file

* `uri` and `alias` are already set by the constructor.
* `port` is 0 which means that it will fall back to 80 for `http://` and 443 for `https://`.
* `priority` decides in which order Registries are scanned in case no Registry was provided. The Registry with the highest number is scanned first, and the first hit wins.

  `⎕NULL` will be converted once the instance is added to the user settings, see there.

  Note that a priority of `0` or less means that the registry will **not** participate in a Registry scan.
* `api_key` must be set only when the Registry is managed by a Tatin server _and_ you want to publish packages, or delete packages (if that is permitted by that Tatin server at all) and credentials are required for those operations.

#### Adding the Registry

Adding a registry is achieved by calling the `AddRegistry` method, and providing an instance of the `DefineRegistry` class as an argument:


```
      ⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.AddRegistry #.myReg
```

Now we would expect three Registries:

```
      ↑⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.registries.(alias uri priority)
 tatin       https://tatin.dev/           100
 myc         https://tatin.mycompany.com/  90
 tatin-test  https://test.tatin.dev/        0
```

The priority is not `⎕NULL` anymore but 90: any `⎕NULL` is replaced by the lowest number yet minus 10.

A> ### Regarding priorities
A> What happens when you add a Registry with `priority` being `⎕NULL` and the lowest Registry so far is 1?
A>
A> In that case Tatin assigns new values to all Registries except those with a priority of zero which will remain untouched.
A>
A> The new priorities will not change the order of the priorities, and the lowest one will be 100 or greater.

So far we have changed the user settings in the workspace, _not_ on file. This allows you to experiment with certain settings without making the change permanent; other sessions won't be affected.

If you want to make your changes permanent you must call the `Save` method and provide a 1 as the right argument.

 -->

`id`

: A unique key that can be used to identify a Registry definition in the user settings file when neither the URL nor an alias can be used for this.

However, because mot of the time URL or alias are sufficient for this, setting `id` is optional.


## The "id"

<!-- FIXME Clarify -->
Because it must be possible to ==define more than one set for the same URL==
--- for different groups! --- in the user settings, the URL does not necessarily qualify as a unique key for a Registry. Neither does the alias, because it is optional, and you may reset it to "undefined".

So we need a unique key for this (though admittedly not many will be in need for this). That's why you may set "id".

<!-- If you use the `DefineRegistry` class then "id" will be a newly created UUID. If you prefer to add a new Registry to the user settings by editing the user settings file then you should add "id" yourself. -->

This has only an impact locally in a scenario mentioned above, and that's why this is optional.



[^init]: Tatin is initialized either explicitly or as a side effect when the first Tatin user command is issued. See ["Installing and updating the Tatin Client"](installingandupdatingthetatinclient.md) for details.

Commit message:

Consolidated Caching into User Settings

docs/source/user-settings.md, after:

---
title: 'Tatin User Settings'
description: ''
keywords:
---
# User settings

!!! abstract "User-settings govern your use of Tatin."


Your Tatin user settings specify your ‘known registries’
– the Tatin registries you want to use –
and some other settings you might use if you publish packages yourself.

When you launch Dyalog[^init], it reads your user-settings file

    tatin-client.json

into `⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings`, a class instance.
If you don’t have a Tatin user-settings file, Dyalog creates one
in your [home folder](user-commands.md#user-settings).

The default user-settings file lists two registries:

          ]ListRegistries
     Alias       URL                     ...
     ----------  ----------------------- ...
     tatin       https://tatin.dev/      ...
     tatin-test  https://test.tatin.dev/ ...

<!-- Implementation detail: not relevant

### What does Tatin do at start-up time?

When Tatin is initialized[^init] it creates an instance of the `UserSettings` class with the name `MyUserSettings` which lives in `⎕se.Tatin`. (Strictly speaking it lives actually in `⎕SE._Tatin`; in `⎕SE.Tatin` there is just a niladic function `MyUserSettings` that returns a reference to `⎕SE._Tatin.MyUserSettings`)

If the constructor does not get a fully qualified name of the user settings file as an argument then it performs two steps:

1. It looks for a file `.tatin` in the user's home folder.

   If the file exists and is not empty then it is expected to point to a user settings file, and Tatin will go for that file.

   We will discuss soon under which circumstances such a file might be useful.

2. In case there is no file `.tatin` in that folder, or the file is empty, Tatin will look for a user settings file in the default folder.

   * If that file exists then Tatin will instantiate it

   * If the file does not exist then it will be created with default settings
 -->

## Edit your settings


??? tip "Edit your settings with the user command"

    You can use any editor to change your user-settings.

    On launching Dyalog,
    Tatin checks your user-settings file is valid JSON5
    and signals any errors in it.

    If you use the user command
    ```
    ]TATIN.UserSettings -edit
    ```
    to edit the file, Tatin will check the file when you save it.

Other settings define the defaults used when you create a new package.

-----------|---------------------------------------------------------
group      | group name your packages will use
license    | license you usually use to publish a package
maintainer | email address of the maintainer of your packages
source     | name of a folder in your package where all source files are stored

??? tip "Comments in JSON5"

    JSON5 accommodates two different types of comments:

    block
    : Everything between `/*` and `*/` is recognized as a comment, e.g.

        ```
        /*
          This is a comment that...
          stretches over several lines
        */.
        ```

    line

    : A line that starts with two slashes, e.g.

        ```
        // This is a comment line
        ```

Editing your user-settings file leaves your current user settings unchanged.
To update them from the file:

    ]TATIN.UserSettings -refresh

To save your current user settings to file:

    ⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings.Save 1


## Cache settings

To reduce network operations, Tatin caches all packages by default, except

-   beta versions
-   packages from registries with an `Any` delete policy

!!! tip "Best delete policies for remote Tatin registries are `None` or `BetasOnly`."

Properties of `⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings` control caching for all known registries.

-----------|--------|----------------------------
caching    | flag   | whether caching is enabled
path2cache | string | path to cache folder; defaults according to OS

The `noCaching` flag in `tatin-client.json` toggle caching for specific registries.

Caching is most commonly disabled for local registries hosting packages being developed.


:fontawesome-solid-terminal:
[`]TATIN.Cache`](user-commands.md#cache)


## Keeping settings elsewhere

For most purposes all you need is a single user-settings file in its default location.

In some circumstances you might prefer to keep your user-settings file elsewhere:

-   You need different settings for corporate and personal projects.
-   You need to edit the settings but do not have write access to your home folder.
-   Your computer is shared with others, at least one of whom needs write access to the settings.

First, change the current user-settings location:
```
      p←,⊂'/path2/user_config_file/'
      ⎕SE._Tatin.Client.MyUserSettings←⎕SE._Tatin.Client.⎕NEW ⎕SE.Tatin.UserSettings p
      ⍴⎕←1 ⎕se.Tatin.ListRegistries 0
tatin      https://tatin.dev       ... 0 100 0
tatin-test https://test.tatin.dev  ... 0   0 0
2 7
      ⍴⎕←⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.ListRegistries 0
 Alias  URL                  Port  Priority No caching Proxy API-key
 -----  ------------------   ----  -------- ---------- ----- -------
 tatin  https://tatin.dev/      0       100          0           ***
 test-tatin  https://tatin.dev/ 0       100          0           ***
2 7
```
Then make the new location the default:
```
      ⎕SE.Tatin.MyUserSettings.MakeDefaultFile 1
```

<!-- You may however want to have your own Tatin Registries, for example for private projects. -->

<!-- WAY TOO CUMBERSOME – JSON SUFFICES

## Adding and removing Registries

You can manipulate the `MyUserSettings` instance via its methods.

We are now going to add a registry, list all registries, and then delete that registry, getting us back to where we started.

### What have we got?

Let's list all registries currently defined:

```
      ⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.ListRegistries 0
Alias      URL                     Port  Priority No caching Proxy API-key
-----      ------------------      ----  -------- ---------- ----- -------
tatin      https://tatin.dev/         0       100          0           ***
tatin-test https://test.tatin.dev/    0         0          0           ***
```

This is because originally Tatin only knows about the principal Tatin server and its cousin, the test server.

Note that the API key is not listed when a zero is provided as the right argument.

Let's add a made-up registry.

#### Create an instance of the `DefineRegistry` class.

Let's assume that you work for a company "MyCompany", and that this company entertains a Tatin Server with the URL `https://tatin.mycompany.com`.

To add that Registry to the user settings file you must first instantiate the `DefineRegistry` class. You may specify the URL and the alias in several ways; for details on the `DefineRegistry` class execute this:

```
]adoc ⎕se.Tatin.DefineRegistry
```

We will pass a simple text vector that specifies the alias (between `[]`) and the URI:

```
      #.myReg←⎕NEW ⎕SE.Tatin.DefineRegistry (,⊂'[myc]https://tatin.mycompany.com')
      #.myReg.varsList
 uri  alias  port  api_key  priority
      ]box on
      {⍵,⍪#.myReg.(⍎¨⍵)}'uri' 'alias' 'port' 'api_key' 'priority'
┌────────┬────────────────────────────┐
│uri     │https://tatin.mycompany.com/│
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│alias   │myc                         │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│port    │0                           │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│api_key │                            │
├────────┼────────────────────────────┤
│priority│[Null]                      │
└────────┴────────────────────────────┘
      ]box off
```

"id" is not mentioned here, because it is optional, and `DefineRegistry` will assign a freshly generated UUID to it for you. Refer to [The "id"](#) for details.

#### Settings in the file

* `uri` and `alias` are already set by the constructor.
* `port` is 0 which means that it will fall back to 80 for `http://` and 443 for `https://`.
* `priority` decides in which order Registries are scanned in case no Registry was provided. The Registry with the highest number is scanned first, and the first hit wins.

  `⎕NULL` will be converted once the instance is added to the user settings, see there.

  Note that a priority of `0` or less means that the registry will **not** participate in a Registry scan.
* `api_key` must be set only when the Registry is managed by a Tatin server _and_ you want to publish packages, or delete packages (if that is permitted by that Tatin server at all) and credentials are required for those operations.

#### Adding the Registry

Adding a registry is achieved by calling the `AddRegistry` method, and providing an instance of the `DefineRegistry` class as an argument:


```
      ⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.AddRegistry #.myReg
```

Now we would expect three Registries:

```
      ↑⎕se.Tatin.MyUserSettings.registries.(alias uri priority)
 tatin       https://tatin.dev/           100
 myc         https://tatin.mycompany.com/  90
 tatin-test  https://test.tatin.dev/        0
```

The priority is not `⎕NULL` anymore but 90: any `⎕NULL` is replaced by the lowest number yet minus 10.

A> ### Regarding priorities
A> What happens when you add a Registry with `priority` being `⎕NULL` and the lowest Registry so far is 1?
A>
A> In that case Tatin assigns new values to all Registries except those with a priority of zero which will remain untouched.
A>
A> The new priorities will not change the order of the priorities, and the lowest one will be 100 or greater.

So far we have changed the user settings in the workspace, _not_ on file. This allows you to experiment with certain settings without making the change permanent; other sessions won't be affected.

If you want to make your changes permanent you must call the `Save` method and provide a 1 as the right argument.

 -->

`id`

: A unique key that can be used to identify a Registry definition in the user settings file when neither the URL nor an alias can be used for this.

However, because mot of the time URL or alias are sufficient for this, setting `id` is optional.


## The "id"

<!-- FIXME Clarify -->
Because it must be possible to ==define more than one set for the same URL==
--- for different groups! --- in the user settings, the URL does not necessarily qualify as a unique key for a Registry. Neither does the alias, because it is optional, and you may reset it to "undefined".

So we need a unique key for this (though admittedly not many will be in need for this). That's why you may set "id".

<!-- If you use the `DefineRegistry` class then "id" will be a newly created UUID. If you prefer to add a new Registry to the user settings by editing the user settings file then you should add "id" yourself. -->

This has only an impact locally in a scenario mentioned above, and that's why this is optional.



[^init]: Tatin is initialized either explicitly or as a side effect when the first Tatin user command is issued. See ["Installing and updating the Tatin Client"](installingandupdatingthetatinclient.md) for details.
